wasi-preview2 article (#83)
bytecodealliance/bytecodealliance.org: _posts/2024-01-25-WASI-Preview2.md

---

> title: WASI Preview 2 Launched

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: WASI 0.2 Launched
```

Reviewer 2: I'm OK with "WASI 0.2", especially as we consistently used that terminology during last week's Plumber's Summit.  I do want to make sure we let people know early on in the post that what we are calling "WASI 0.2" here used to be widely referred to "WASI Preview 2" and is still going to be encountered using that previous nomenclature. (E.g. the repo is WASI/preview2.)

So I'm fine with WASI 0.2 in the title but think we should make that point as early in the document as possible to minimize confusion.

Also, Eric Gregory has just staged a PR with his write-ups from both days of last week's Plumber's Summit and he uses the "Preview 2" and "Preview 3" nomenclature there.  Should we ask him to change that??

Lastly, you aren't modifying your blog post to be "0.2" instead of "Preview 2" are you @sunfishcode ??

Reviewer: > So I'm fine with WASI 0.2 in the title but think we should make that point as early in the document as possible.

Yes, on line 13 here I have added a mention that "WASI 0.2" is also known as "WASI Preview 2".

> Also, Eric Gregory has just staged a PR with his write-ups from both days of last week's Plumber's Summit and he uses the "Preview 2" and "Preview 3" nomenclature there. Should we ask him to change that??

Yeah. It's not absolutely necessary, but it would be good if he could change that.

> Lastly, you aren't modifying your blog post to be "0.2" instead of "Preview 2" are you @sunfishcode ??

I have now modified the post to be "0.2".

Reviewer 2: Cool. I relayed word to @ericgregory so he can look at changing things in his posts.

Also, will the URL to your post still be https://blog.sunfishcode.online/wasi-preview2/?

Reviewer: I'll keep that URL live, but I'll add a new URL based on WASI 0.2 as soon as I can figure out how to do that in my blog software here.

Reviewer: The new URL is now live: https://blog.sunfishcode.online/wasi-0-2/

author: "Dan Gohman"
github_name: sunfishcode
---

> > Original post from https://blog.sunfishcode.online/wasi-preview2/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Original post from https://blog.sunfishcode.online/wasi-0-2/
```

> The WASI Subgroup has just voted to launch WASI Preview 2! This blog post

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WASI Subgroup has just voted to launch WASI 0.2, also known as WASI Preview 2, or WASIp2! This blog post
```

Reviewer 2: Can we put the "formerly known as 'Preview 2'" clarification here as the opening sentence in the post and the first opportunity to do so (rather than as the next change below)?

Reviewer: Sure.

is a brief look at the present, past, and future of WASI.

## The present

> The Subgroup voted to launch Preview 2!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Subgroup voted to launch WASI 0.2!
```

Reviewer 2: If this is the best place to call out that 0.2 was formerly known as Preview 2 then OK, but I proposed doing that in the opening paragraph in my comment above.  Let me know what you think.

Reviewer: Sounds good. I've now updated the edits.

This is a major milestone! We made it! At the same time, the journey is
only just beginning. But let's talk this moment to step back and look at
what this means.

Most immediately, what this means is that the WASI Subgroup officially

> says that the Preview 2 APIs are stable. There is still a lot more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
says that the WASI 0.2 APIs are stable. There is still a lot more
```

to do, in writing more documentation, more tests, more toolchains, more
implementations, and there are a lot more features that we all want to add.
This vote today is a milestone along the way, rather than a destination in
itself.

It also means that WASI is now officially based on the Wasm [component model],
which makes it cross-language and virtualizable. Figuring out what a
component model even is, designing it, implementing it, and building APIs
using it has been a huge effort with involving many people, and it's now
officially in WASI. Yay!

> Preview 2 includes two *worlds*:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WASI 0.2 includes two *worlds*:
```

Even [Mark Miller's PhD thesis] about capability-based security is literally
titled "Robust Composition". It's right there. It's what this is all about.
How do we put together parts to make a whole, without all kinds of complexities
creeping in?

 - Cross-language interop is needed to compose components written in
   different languages.

 - Component isolation supports composition without the fear of components
   having unexpected conflicts.

 - No global namespace at runtime, so that composed component don't
   collide in or have differing requirements of the namespace.

 - Any interface can be virtualized, which is to say, composed with
   any implementation of that interface.

 - The output of linking two components is a component, so composition
   can happen incrementally.

 - Capabilities are a way to compose two components together, in which
   they share some parts of themselves with each other and not others.

There's a lot more to these topics, but this is hopefully enough to paint
the picture that there are some themes that all fit well with each other,
within the conceptual framework of composition.

> And so, Preview 2 represents not just a new API, but a new approach to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And so, WASI 0.2 represents not just a new API, but a new approach to
```

APIs that gets us out of worrying about C ABI fragility, or C pointer hazards,
and that has reasonable paths forward for supporting many different
programming languages without hard fragmentation. It even allows us to not

> worry so much about getting Preview 2 itself perfectly right for all time,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
worry so much about getting WASI 0.2 itself perfectly right for all time,
```

> because we know we can virtualize Preview 2 itself in terms of future APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
because we know we can virtualize WASI 0.2 itself in terms of future APIs.
```

> This is why the Subgroup voting to launch Preview 2 is such a big deal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is why the Subgroup voting to launch WASI 0.2 is such a big deal.
```

## Looking ahead

Ok, that's a high-level view of how we got here. What's next?

In terms of standards, there are two activities that people are already

> looking forward to. With Preview 2 finalized, it'll be time to start planning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
looking forward to. With WASI 0.2.0 finalized, it'll be time to start planning
```

> for things we want to add in a Preview 2.1 soon after it. That'll be another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for things we want to add in a WASI 0.2.1 soon after it. That'll be another
```

> milestone: the first update to Preview 2, which will establish how to do updates,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
milestone: the first update to WASI 0.2, which will establish how to do updates,
```

> and set up the rhythm for doing incremental updates. Preview 2 is small still;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and set up the rhythm for doing incremental updates. WASI 0.2 is small still;
```

we had to scope down a number of features that people really wanted, so we're

> looking forward to doing many updates in 2.1 and beyond.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
looking forward to doing many updates in WASI 0.2.1 and beyond.
```

> At the same time, work towards Preview 3 will be getting underway. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, work towards WASI 0.3, also known as Preview 3, will be getting underway. The
```

> major banner of Preview 3 is *async*, and adding the `future` and `stream` types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
major banner of WASI 0.3 is *async*, and adding the `future` and `stream` types
```

to Wit. And here again, the theme is *composability*. It's one thing to do
async, it's another to do *composable* async, where two components that are
async can be composed together without either event loop having to be nested
inside the other. Designing an async system flexible enough for Rust, C#,
JavaScript, Go, and many others, which all have their own perspectives on async,

> will take some time, so while the design work is starting now, Preview 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will take some time, so while the design work is starting now, WASI 0.3
```

is expected to be at least a year away.
 

> And when we do get there, the transition from Preview 2 to Preview 3 should be much smoother

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And when we do get there, the transition from WASI 0.2 to WASI 0.3 should be much smoother
```

> than Preview 1 to Preview 2. The component model's virtualizability means it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than WASI 0.1 to WASI 0.2. The component model's virtualizability means it
```

> should be easier to polyfill Preview 2 in terms of Preview 3. And, it should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should be easier to polyfill WASI 0.2 in terms of WASI 0.3. And, it should be
```

> easier for engines to support both Preview 2 and Preview 3 at the same time if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
easier for engines to support both WASI 0.2 and WASI 0.3 at the same time if
```

> they wish to, because Preview 2 will essentially use a subset of Preview 3's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they wish to, because WASI 0.2 will essentially use a subset of WASI 0.3's
```

language features.

## Wrapping it up

> Preview 2 is a major milestone that many people have contributed to, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WASI 0.2, also known as WASI Preview 2 or WASIp2, is a major milestone that many people have contributed to, and
```
